In this video we will discuss how to search for
a node in a doubly linked list
So to search an ordinary doubly linked list we have
to traverse the list
Compare the key with each nodes data
And if any node matches with the key then the
search key is present in the list
And if we reach the end of the list and
we did not find a match then the search key is
not present in this list
For example we have this doubly linked list here with
elements 10 20 and 30
Let a search for key 30 here
So iterate the list starting from the head node
and compare the data part of each node with the
key
So first compare 30 with head and they are not
the same
So move to next node and compare 30 with 20
again
It is not the same
So move to the next
node compare 30 with this nodes data and now they
are the same
So the search is successful
Now
Let a search for the key 100
So Travers the doubly linked list compare the key with
data part of each node
First compare 100 with the head nodes data and they
are not the same
So move to the next node and compare 100 with
20 again
They are not the same
So move to next
node
Compare 100 with this nodes data and against it's not
the same
And since we have traversed the complete list and reached
the end we can say the key 100 is not
present in this list
So the search is unsuccessful and this is the code
to implement the programme and the function search will be
doing the search operation and returns the result of search
we are passing the head of the linked list and key
to be searched into this function
So we have public boolean search of int key so as
we discussed we have to iterate over the linked
list
so let us create temp pointing to head so that we can
start iterating from the beginning So write node temp equal
to head
Now this while loop is used to Travers and check
If the node is the key if the key is
found then the function will return true And if the
Key is not found then it will return False
Here Let a search for Element 30
So we will call the function search with key 30
so in the function temp is created and initialised to
head
So first we will check if temp which is pointing
to head now is null If it is null it
means we have reached the end of the linked list
and it will not end other while loop so write
while temp not equal to null here temp equal to 1000
which is not equal to null
So and other loop now check
If the data at this node is the key so
write temp dot data equal to key
If so key is found so returned true else Just
keep on searching the next nodes so move temp to
next node so write temp equal to temp dot Next
So here compare temp data ten with key 30 But
it is not the same
So if will fail so jump to the next statement
Move temp to next node
Now temp will point the next node which is at
address 2000 again
The while condition is checked and we have temp equal
to 2000 which is not equal to null so entered
the loop and now compare 20 with 30
But it's not the same
So if fails again and temp will be moved to
the next node so temp will now point to the
next node at Address 3000 Now again check
If temp has become null and it has not so
enter the while loop and check
If data at 3000 is equal to the key and
when we compare the data 30 and the key 30
both are the same
So if will become true and it will return true
as the key is found
So this is how it works
Now let us see another case where the search key
is not found so that the key to be searched
be 100 first temp is initialised to head and we have the
while condition temp not equal null and temp equal to 1000
here which is not equal to null
So ender the loop and check if the data at
address 1000 is the key so compare 10 with 100
But the comparison returns false
So if condition fails and temp is moved to the
next node so now 10 points to the second node
again checked the while condition we have temp equal to
2000 not equal to null
So condition is true
So entered a loop and check
If this node is holding the Key 100 but the
comparison returns false and if condition fails so temp will
now point to the next node at address 3000
So again in the next iteration When we checked the
while condition we have temp equal to 3000 not equal to null
in all so condition is true
So enter the loop and compare it data at this
node with the key but we have 30 and 100
so the comparison will fail
And if will fail jump to next statement which is
temp equal to temp next and temp next is equal
to null here which will be stored in 10
So so in the next iteration when we checked the
while condition we have temp equal to null
So the condition is failed and control will come out
of the while loop and return false as the key
is not found
So that said this is how we can search an
Ordinary doubly linked list
Now let us talk about the time complexity the best
cases when the search key is present in the first
node itself
So while Loop need to execute only ones so the
best case time complexity will be order of one and
the worst cases when the search key is present in
the last node
So if you have n nodes the while loop will have
n iterations worst case time complexity is order of n